My grandfather, he was just a remarkable man. He was an extreme disciplinarian. He brought
my father unfortunately, I lost him during the war. I lived with my grandfather from
birth till I was 17 years of age. So in fact he was my father more than anybody else. He
was a disciplinarian. He was highly intelligent, very successful. I always remember when I
joined the British Army he wrote me a letter and the first thing he put on it was, remember
always to clean the welts of your shoes. I remember it to this day. He said because
when you're on parade the officers will look down and if you've got dirty welts. He taught
me manners. He taught me how to behave. Although I'm 80 years of age now, I'll never forget
it and he was a very strict but a good man. He had a very, very, very hard job. Times
you think about it now, he used to hand make all this mineral water, crates and crates
and crates of it. There were no heating, it was very difficult and he'd load up a horse
and cart or a lorry in the winter and then suddenly a frost would come, break all the
bottles. Can you imagine it? And hundreds of the hours and had to do it all again. He'd
open his shop on a Sunday morning and literally during the war the queues, a penny a bottle,
tuppence a bottle, things like that. And I used to count all the pennies and literally
maybe a hundred pound he'd take on a Sunday morning which was all in pennies and tuppences.
And eventually he got old and he died at the age of 69 and he sold the business then I
believe to a company, another mineral water company. But he was very shrewd and he had
a house in Dukestown, the factory was next to the house and next to the factory he let
out a huge building to the Cooperative Wholesale Society who used it as a food warehouse during
the war. Now my earliest memories as a child was in the middle of the night of police and
other people coming with little tins to get food and it was very, very interesting how
they all did it and he was so generous with people, you know. The house was called Hawthorne
House and it became a staging post for refugees fleeing from Nazi Germany and the continent.
They used to come to Tredegar and I can remember them vividly with long beards and big hats
and couldn't speak English and they'd come to the house. My grandfather would give them
then a five pound note, clothing, send them then to the next post which was probably in
Birmingham then they'd do the same there and send them to Manchester and they'd disperse
themselves but they all came to Tredegar. My cousins and I, I'm sorry to say, used to
make fun of them and we used to call them Vishki Vashkis because they had such great
big whiskers, I've never forgotten it. And we also adopted a couple of children, my grandfather
did, we took them in, refugees. The house was always full of people. I don't think there
was never a period between 1942 and 1944, two years, three years, where the house wasn't
there. They had nine bedrooms, every night people were sleeping there and they had no
clothes, no they were in rags. How they came to, it is quite a story and a lot of them
became so successful in life afterwards but they were, they got out of Nazi Germany and
in fact in Merthyr Tidville there was a house there and I happened to know the gentleman
and he was doing some work in the house and he was stripping the walls and he had all
these names on this wall here and they were Jewish children who had written their names
on the wall and I believe the Jewish, the Kfarther Park Museum is trying to get those
names put in there. But the history, it means my grandparents were so much involved, you
know they were frightened to death that Hitler would invade because God knows we wouldn't
be here today if they had. And they did as much as they could and he wasn't on his own.
Jewish people in Triniga, in Cardiff, all over South Wales were so good to the Jewish
refugees. I don't think it would happen today the way they, you know, they realised what
was going on. They couldn't believe what they were saying because there was no news
coming out of Germany like this. And this is very strange, my uncle who came from Czechoslovakia,
his father and his brother was a Rabbi in Cardiff and he married my aunt. He was fought
in the First World War, in the Second World War, he was decorated from Gadendry at Dunkirk
but he was still a Czech national. Now he married my aunt and he was waiting for his
nationalisation papers to come. I can remember vividly at the end of the war, 1945 this must
have been, how old was I? I was probably about seven. And there was such a scene in the house,
he had a little baby, a telegram had arrived from the home office ordering him out of the
country to deport him because his nationalisation papers. My grandfather lifted up a telephone
and got through to an iron beaven who, my grandfather was a mentor of his and who supported
him very much and within hours it had all been put right and of course, but it was a
terrible shock at that time. He was very much involved with the Labour Party, my grandfather,
he was a tremendous socialist and I think he turned in his grave if he saw what was
happening today. And my mother in fact was a great friend of Jenny Lee so the association
goes back and it even goes back to me because when I was a young boy and we come to one
of the things here, I was educated in a Jewish school in London because there was no schooling,
no ministers, we used to have a Rabbi come over the mountains from Abedai to teach my
cousin and myself Hebrew which he did and my grandfather taught me but Jewish boys at
the age of 13 as you know get bar mitzvah and I had to go to a Jewish school to get
the knowledge. Now we had one particular day we went to the House of Commons and who should
I see was an iron beaven and I went up to him, much to the astonishment of the school
and he picked me up when I mentioned to him I was from Tredegar, a couple of weeks later
we had an invite from him to my school, invited myself and three of my friends to have tea
with him.